[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEARTBEATS]
>>SUE MORTER: Are you tired
of going to 30 doctors
to try and figure
out what is causing
yours or your loved ones
chronic illness only to hear,
they don't know what's wrong?
Or are you just wanting
to get to the root
of what your body is
all about and how it's
working for you personally?
Functional medicine
may be your answer.
Dr. Jill Carnahan
knows this firsthand,
as she's beaten the odds with
not one death sentence but two.
Welcome, Dr. Jill,
to "Healing Matrix."
>>JILL CARNAHAN:
Thank you, Dr. Sue.
>>SUE: Let's dig right in.
Tell us what happened in your
third year of medical school.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
So I always say, I
was born to overcome.
Because I was going
along living my life,
pursuing my dream of becoming
a functional medicine
doctor in allopathic
medical school,
and during my third year, I
found a lump in my breast.
Suddenly-- I did not actually
think it was anything serious.
But as I talked to friends and
family, everyone, of course,
encouraged me to
get it checked out.
So I did.
And when you're in medical
school, your medical doctors,
the gyne oncologist
that help me,
they're not only colleagues,
but their friends and teachers.
So it's a very
personal experience,
because I knew them as
faculty, and this and that.
So I went ahead and had an
ultrasound and a mammogram.
I remember very clearly sitting
next to the radiologist right
to my side.
You know, when you're
a student you're always
looking for teaching
opportunities,
so this was no different.
I said, can look at my films
with you, as I sat beside him.
And I said, show me
what you're seeing.
And I could tell he
was a little nervous.
And I knew something was up when
his voice cracked and he said,
Jill, you know,
you're 25, but if this
were a 55-year-old woman,
these classifications
are highly indicative
of aggressive cancer.
And I paused, just
like we did here.
And I knew--
I'm a very intuitive person.
I knew at that moment that
something was not right.
>>SUE: You knew what was coming.
>>CARNAHAN: And
yet, I don't think
I had the comprehension at that
point of what was in store.
So I had that.
And then of course, with
an abnormal mammogram,
you need a biopsy.
And so I had a biopsy,
again with a surgeon who
is also a colleague and friend.
Three days after the surgery,
she called me at my home
on my cell phone
and said, Jill, I
don't know how to tell you this,
but you have breast cancer.
And it's very, very aggressive.
It's the highest grade
of cells possible, which
means they're rapidly dividing.
They're about as
aggressive as they get.
And in young women,
breast cancer
is a whole different ballgame.
I was in a group in
Chicago, after my diagnosis,
of 12 women under 40.
I was one of the youngest.
And I am the only one of
those 12 still living.
So this was-- I didn't even
know what I was headed into,
but I knew that it was serious.
And I buckled down for
the battle of my life.
Fortunately, I have always
had a very strong faith.
And a very large
part of my healing
was prayer, was
people from my church
and my family surrounding
me praying for me,
taking care of me,
loving me through it.
And just even the sense of--
I love the work
of Viktor Frankl,
because he talks about how the
will is the indomitable part
of the human spirit and how--
And when I say I was
born to overcome,
God gave me a gift of
a very strong will.
And what that meant was there
was never a doubt in my mind
that I could overcome it.
Even though I faced
the fear of surgery,
and losing all my hair through
radiation and chemotherapy,
and all the things I
had to go through--
they were painful
and difficult--
but my internal will was never
broken and never once wavered.
And I think part of that
is due to my faith in God
and the strength that he
gave me through that time.
So I got the diagnosis.
And then I had to
face the journey
with treatment and decisions.
>>SUE: I definitely
want to speak
into this perspective
of your unwavering
will and your faith that played
a role in your healing process.
It's obviously been a big
part of your entire regime.
But first, let's just stop
and make sure that we clarify.
So you got this diagnosis.
And overnight, you went
from doctor to patient.
And you found yourself
going into traditional means
of response to this
kind of diagnosis.
Can you share with us a little
bit about that experience?
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
It's so interesting, because
my first thought was, oh,
this won't effect my life.
I'm going to keep
going to school,
and it will not stop me.
I'm also very stubborn,
which is part of that will.
And it has served
me well many times
and gotten me into
trouble other times, but--
>>SUE: Good news,
not so good news.
>>CARNAHAN: Exactly.
[LAUGHTER]
But the stubbornness
is part of that will.
And I was like, gosh darn
it, this is not going
to keep me-- hold me back.
Very soon through treatment,
I realized there was no way.
It made me so sick.
Of course, I had to take
a medical leave of absence
for that.
So I did.
But as far as the decision,
one of the most profound things
for your listeners to
understand-- because they all
know someone, themselves
or family members
or friends who've gone
through cancer or treatments,
and we think it's
black and white.
And one of the most
difficult things about it
is, here I was in one of
the best medical schools
in the country, had a
medical education behind me,
and I looked at the
options for treatment,
and I was so confused
and overwhelmed.
And that was with a
medical background.
So I have such compassion
for the patients who
are faced with their diagnosis.
And they're trying
to decide what to do.
And especially if they
have conventional options
and integrative and holistic
and functional medicine options
in deciding how
to implement that.
I literally went through
stacks and stacks
of research trying to figure
out what was the best option.
And even then, there's no
black and white answers.
What I knew is that my cancer
was extremely aggressive,
and that if I didn't
act fast and swiftly
that it could take my life.
So with that knowledge, I went
into conventional treatment.
I did basically the
full-fledged, three-drug
chemotherapy for six rounds.
I was telling someone earlier,
I basically had the maximum
cardiotoxic-- which means the
amount that could just take
your heart to the edge
before it stops beating--
of one of the drugs
and of the radiation.
So they went right to the edge--
>>SUE: Maxed you out.
>>CARNAHAN: --the
calculated dose
of what I could tolerate before
my heart would stop beating.
And they gave me that dose.
And that was both the
chemotherapy and the radiation.
So I went into it knowing that.
And I also knew--
I was always a fan of
more natural options.
I went into medical school
wanting to change the system
and learn options
for natural healing.
So that was my heart
even before cancer.
But as I was faced
with this diagnosis,
I had to actually apply
it to my own life.
And I had to decide.
And I decided conventional,
but a lot of the healing
took place later with the
alternative and holistic types
of treatments.
>>SUE: Interesting.
Unbelievable.
I can't imagine being
in this moment where
you, like everyone else that
gets a diagnosis such as this,
so many options
are thrown at you,
you have to make a decision.
Do I do this?
Or do I try do some
of these other things?
So in all of that, and in
your decision-making process,
what do you feel was the
most important component
in your plan to heal?
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: What happened?
>>CARNAHAN: Every
step of my life, God
has given me
discernment and wisdom.
And I so often--
I'm a natural planner.
I'm kind of a type A. I have
a five-year, 10-year plans
and goals.
But the more and
more God gives me
things that are either
difficult or not expected,
the more I step back and just
say, God, whatever you want,
I will do and I will
follow you and you will--
And he always, always gives
me the answers and the people
and the resources.
I have so many
stories of miracles.
This was one of the big ones.
I remember in the very
first week of my diagnosis,
I was listening to the radio.
Some podcast came on.
And the person was
quoting from scripture.
And it said, the sickness
will not end in death,
but it's for the glory
of God that his son
might be glorified.
And it cut me to the heart.
I stopped breathing.
And I knew I wasn't
going to die.
I knew.
And I knew, this is before.
Now, I have a platform,
and I can teach,
and I have lots of impact in
the world because of my story.
At that moment at
25, I had no idea
what God had in store for me.
But what I knew is I knew
that will he gave me was my--
my faith and my will was
my ability to overcome this
and that he would
use it for a purpose.
And the universal
principle there
is that suffering, if
we can take it as such,
has purpose and value.
And if we can take it and
use it to inspire and impact
other lives, then it
has purpose and meaning.
If we have suffering and
we don't take it and use it
and harvest it for the good
of other people later on,
it has no meaning.
And it's horrible to go through.
And I lost all my hair.
I was the lowest weight I'd
been since 13 years old.
I was sick, I was malnourished.
It was not pleasant.
It was one of the most painful
experiences of my life.
But because I knew
from day seven
that I was not going
to die and that God
was going to use it for
a purpose, which he has,
I was able to go
through all of that,
knowing that there
was an end point
and there was something
greater at the end.
>>SUE: Did you feel that the
weight loss and coming down
to that frail state was
because of the cancer
or because of the treatment?
>>CARNAHAN: I love this
question, because so often
people don't really understand.
The cancer was easy.
It was so easy to beat.
I probably-- who
knows if I could have
beat it or not even without
all the extensive treatments.
But what I've covered
the last 17 years from
is the treatment of the cancer.
It was toxic chemotherapeutic--
These are like agents that
are used in chemical warfare
at times.
They're very, very toxic.
And they're toxic to all
rapidly dividing cells, which
means your reproductive organs.
It means your gut lining.
It means your brain.
It means your skin.
And so it devastates many-- it's
like a atomic bomb going off
and creating--
It might kill the cancer
cells, but it really
creates a lot of
collateral damage.
>>SUE: It's almost as if the
cancer doesn't kill you, the--
>>CARNAHAN: Exactly.
>>SUE: --chemotherapy will.
>>SUE: So something has
to land that we overcome
this entire regime,
the entire combination
of the original illness and
then this toxic approach
to the treatment.
And I just want to ask
something about your faith
and this relationship
with God that you
feel has had such a beautiful
role in your recovery.
Was there any
reconciliation for you
that you had to come
to that if God was here
to help in the
healing process, was
God not available beforehand
that allowed my system
to get sick in the first place?
What was that
reconciliation for you?
What happened for you in that?
>>CARNAHAN: Well, you know, I
know a lot of people struggle
with that question.
And I have such compassion,
because it's so real.
And the fact that God
can allow suffering
is hard to grapple with.
I remember, as a
very young girl,
I was in situations that
were not healthy and somewhat
abusive.
And I remember
very young knowing
that God was the one that
I could always rely on.
And for me, it was so powerful.
Probably like 3,
4, 5, 6 years old,
I had this sense of who God
was and that he was always
going to be there for me.
And for me, I've
never wavered in that.
I've never doubted his goodness.
And so even in the midst
of tragedy and pain
and suffering and a
terminal diagnosis,
my question wasn't, why God?
It was, God, what do you
want to do with this?
And how can you use
this in my life?
So it was a searching
for meaning.
It was kind of like
Frankl, again--
>>SUE: Sure.
>>CARNAHAN: --meaning.
It was searching
for meaning in it.
And once you find--
>>SUE: Turn this into
something beneficial,
turn this into something that is
going to serve me and everyone.
>>CARNAHAN: Others, right.
And I had no idea,
because again now it's
easy to look back
and say, of course.
But God was preparing
me for what he had
in store, which is made my--
the health practitioner
and the ability
to inspire other
practitioners and patients.
But the stories are
a core part of it.
So I had to go through it.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Here with "Healing Matrix,"
what we're looking for is,
how do we get sick, and
how can we prevent it,
and how do we live not
in a way of prevention
but in robust vitality?
How do we just come forward
living in our fullness,
so that illness isn't even
really in the picture?
Now, I noticed something
when you were describing,
and in some of the materials
that I was reading beforehand
to get to know you a little bit,
that you described your life as
very organized, and you had a
plan, and you were very strong
will.
And I'm curious if you feel that
that taking life by the reins
and driving and making things
happen the way that they're
supposed to, if you feel that
that played any role in maybe
exhausting your system or
having you feel disconnected
to this support of the
divine, of the universe,
or of God, however
we reference that.
Was there an
isolated separateness
that you felt at that
time before the diagnosis
that you no longer feel because
you opened and surrendered
in some way?
Was there any kind of--
Can you speak to
that relationship?
>>CARNAHAN: I would love to.
I'm a recovering
perfectionist and a little bit
of a control freak.
>>SUE: I understand.
>>CARNAHAN: And of course, that
got me through medical school,
because was so driven and
very driven with grades
and academics and all that.
But what I found is--
the one word that
came to mind as you're
speaking is surrender.
Over and over again, surrender.
I've just come to
this point of I know,
I've seen it over and
over again that God's plan
is better than my plan.
And as I surrender,
miracles happen.
And I've just seen it over
and over and over again.
God brings the people, the
love, the beauty, the things
that I have always wanted.
But it's not me grappling
and making it happen.
It's me letting
go and saying, OK,
God, your time and your will,
how do you see this in my life?
And he brings literally miracles
every day the more I surrender.
>>SUE: I'm going to show up.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: But I'm open to all--
>>CARNAHAN: Exactly
>>SUE: --the facilitation
and assistance.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>SUE: But I'm going to show up.
I'm just not going to believe
that it's up to me only.
And I think that's--
>>CARNAHAN: And think about
the weight we carried.
I carry that weight.
I carried this
weight on my shoulder
that it was all
my responsibility,
and that if I failed, the
world would fall apart.
And of course,
that's ridiculous.
But now I've really realized
it's my responsibility
to show up every day, do my
best, make no assumptions,
all of the four agreements
really is what I live by.
But all of those things come
from a place of surrender
and knowing that
whatever happens,
even if I'm stuck in traffic,
I'm late to an appointment,
God has a purpose.
He might be protecting me for
something I didn't even see.
>>SUE: Yes.
So there is something called
the iron law of cancer.
I don't know if you're
familiar with that.
But some German research that
years ago in the '80s there was
research that has then been
re-researched since stating
that in the cases of 40,000
patients studied that a couple
of years--
1 and 1/2 to 2 and 1/2 years
prior to their diagnosis--
that there was some
unrelenting, emotional impact,
something deeply stressful
for an individual that
impacted their whole system.
And then 1 year and 1/2
to 2 and 1/2 years later,
these diagnoses start
surfacing in their lives.
And just-- it's
considered quackery
by some cancer surgeons.
And yet, the alternative
health care arena
has been working
with this for decades
now and finding that there
is true transformation that
can occur when we
connect the dots inside.
And so I'm just wondering if
you have any comment on it.
Was there anything
like this in your life?
Was it the stress
of medical school?
Was there anything that you
felt was [GRUNTS] really
got you to the bone?
>>CARNAHAN: Well, yes.
It's interesting, because
medical school was brutal.
I loved it.
But it was before the
work hour regulations,
and we would do 36-hour shifts
in a heartbeat with no sleep.
And just physically,
mentally, emotionally, it
was very taxing.
I had gotten married at 21.
And when I got married, I
inherited three stepchildren.
And I had a wonderful ex-husband
and wonderful children,
but that was lot
to take on at 21.
So if you can
imagine, a lot of that
was just inheriting
three children,
helping to raise them, doing
medical school full time.
It was a lot.
And the breast cancer,
I have learned since,
a lot of women with breast
cancer, there's this nurturing.
>>SUE: Yeah.
That's it.
>>CARNAHAN: Right?
And I was the nurturer.
And I gave and gave and gave and
didn't have great boundaries.
So I think in a sense, like
what I've learned since then,
is the balance of giving
and receiving, and often
even letting someone, allowing
them to give to you is a gift
to them.
And if I'm always about
giving, giving, giving
and not receiving, I'm
taking away their joy.
>>SUE: And gets out of balance.
>>CARNAHAN: It gets
out of balance.
>>SUE: For you.
And anytime we're
out of balance--
I work with energy
medicine and bioenergetics
and that everything is
vibrational frequency.
And if we're not--
if we're over-giving in
nurturing and we're not
receiving, then the aspects
of us that are our nurturing
tissues, our vibrational
components that represent
our own nurturing self become
compromised, which is--
>>CARNAHAN: Yes, which is
breast, of course, health.
>>SUE: --the ovaries, the
womb, the breasts, et cetera,
are our nurturing
components physically.
So tell us a little bit about
how you repaired your body.
You get to this point, you
came through all of this.
And then at some
point, you took ahold
and you started doing
something differently.
Can you share with
us what that was?
>>CARNAHAN: I can.
When I did the chemotherapy,
and even the radiation,
I sought out very
specific environments.
One, with the chemotherapy
was a center where they also
had naturopathic,
they had nutrition,
they had pastoral care,
ministry, and prayer.
So I had the conventional
drug, but I also
had a lot of other things around
me even during the treatment.
But like you said, I came out
of there and I was malnourished,
I was bald, which
I love to share.
There's another word.
Bald is so not fun to
say, but "glaborious,"
which is hairless.
It's so much nicer to
say I'm "glaborious."
>>SUE: "Glaborious."
>>CARNAHAN: "Glaborious."
>>SUE: Beautiful in
your "glaborious."
>>CARNAHAN: Which is hairless,
but still it sounds better.
So I would always say that.
But I came out of
there very, very thin,
lost a lot of muscle
mass, very sick.
And my gut was
profoundly affected,
as most people are with
chemotherapy, because there's
lots of rapidly dividing cells.
So I dug into, what does it
take to actually heal the cells?
I did a lot of nutritional
therapies, naturopathy.
I did acupuncture.
I did massage, lots of
different things in the realm.
And I really feel like it
took in maybe 10 or 12 years
to heal from the toxic drugs.
>>SUE: Hm, I understand.
I've worked with
patients for 30 years.
And this is what I see.
So you complete your treatment.
And you get back into school.
And you're beginning again.
And six months later,
something happens.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: Will you
share that with us?
>>CARNAHAN: I sure will.
So I remember being rotation.
I was in ER rotation.
So the shifts are all night
long and different hours.
And I had just
gotten off my leave.
So I was like, OK, I'm
going to go back and finish.
I had a little over a year left.
And I remember working
these shifts with 102 fever.
I was sick, I was so sick.
And I was not-- no one knew.
I was stoic there
and just kind of--
and I knew something
wasn't quite right,
but I assumed it was
all the chemotherapy
and what I had
just been through.
But I continued to deteriorate.
I had more weight loss,
abdominal pain, diarrhea,
bleeding.
And eventually, I had
to get it checked out.
And I was given a diagnosis
of Crohn's disease, which
is, again, another
life-threatening, autoimmune
illness.
And I thought,
what in the world?
What now?
There's no doubt in my mind
now it was all connected.
We'll talk a little later
about autoimmunity and all
those different connections.
But the chemotherapy
was a trigger
that took me into active
Crohn's disease right
after the chemotherapy.
>>SUE: So for our
viewers, can you just
explain what Crohn's disease is
and what your experience of it
even after the diagnosis was?
>>CARNAHAN: So our
bowel nourishes us.
We're interfacing with our
environment through the bowel.
That's really the
only way we interface
with our mucosal layer
through the environment.
And obviously, that
attack of chemotherapy
had a profound effect on that.
Crohn's disease
is basically when
some trigger, like chemotherapy
or abnormal microbiome,
starts to cause your
body to attack self.
And in the case of--
So this could be any
autoimmune disease.
It could be
rheumatoid arthritis,
which attacks joints,
MS, which attacks
brain and nervous system.
In my case, Crohn's, the
body attacks the gut lining.
So it creates these sores
and ulcers basically all
along the GI tract.
So typically, people will
have weight loss, pain,
malnutrition, lots of bleeding.
And it can be fatal.
Because when you think about
the nourishment and lack
of nourishment, if
that's not happening,
you can die from this disease.
>>SUE: So your
gastroenterologist
is obviously working
with you in this moment,
and trying to come up with
solutions, and telling you
what is important
and what isn't now
in this new moment of your life.
What did they say?
What did they do for
you in that moment?
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
I still remember the
room-- and again,
it's a colleague that taught
our lectures in medical school--
sitting next to
him, and he tells me
I have Crohn's disease.
And he said, Jill, this
is a lifelong illness.
It's incurable.
You're going to have it
the rest of your life.
Our options right
now are steroids.
We can do that now.
We also have
immune-modulating drugs
if the steroids don't work.
You're probably
going to have surgery
throughout your life
for different resection
parts of the bowel.
Because as they get
damaged, sometimes you just
have to cut them out.
And I just kind
of looked at him.
And I'm very intuitive.
And even though I didn't know
all the answers as third year
medical school student, I still
knew, gosh, this doesn't seem--
I think I can overcome this too.
>>SUE: Yeah, it doesn't
sound like a very good plan.
>>CARNAHAN: But it
didn't sound good, right?
And I didn't like the idea of
lifelong drugs and surgery--
>>SUE: You bet.
>>CARNAHAN: --and
immune-modulating agents.
But I remember thinking,
maybe food could do it.
Food's really good.
And I knew--
I wanted to do nutrition.
And I ask him, I
said, what about diet?
Does diet have
anything to do with it?
He looked at me point-blank,
leaned over, and said, Jill,
diet has nothing
to do with this.
And that was the
moment I fired him.
>>SUE: Wait.
Wait.
Diet has nothing to do--
>>CARNAHAN: Nothing
to do with this.
>>SUE: So what you're putting
in your body has nothing to do--
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah, has
nothing to do with this.
>>SUE: --with your
body's ability to heal
or how this irritation,
inflammation is being set up
and continuing.
Really?
>>CARNAHAN: Really.
Right?
And that's what--
I felt like--
>>SUE: And you knew.
>>CARNAHAN: --I
didn't know anything.
But my intuitive self
was like, you are--
I'm going to prove you wrong.
That was the stubborn
Jill coming up and saying,
I'm going to prove you wrong.
>>SUE: This is where the good
news part of stubborn Jill.
>>CARNAHAN: I was
like, I am not--
I'm going to show this
guy that there is a way.
And I had no clue
what I was doing.
But I dove into the literature.
By God's grace, I came across
Elaine Gottschall's Specific
Carbohydrate Diet, which
had been shown to reverse
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's.
And it's funny,
part of my story is
I had become vegetarian at 14.
I was from a farming family
in the Midwest, steak
and potatoes.
And some reason, I-- now I
know, because when you're born
and you have poor digestion
due to stress levels,
you often don't produce
enough stomach acid,
you're low in zinc.
And all of these
factors contribute
to lack of taste for meat.
And so I think there was other
physiological things that
led me to being vegetarian.
And so I was vegetarian
from 14 to 25.
And part of my story
is that diet for me
almost killed me, because I
gravitated towards a heavier
carb diet.
And unbeknownst to me, I
also had celiac disease.
So gluten was a very
toxic trigger for me.
And I was eating
lots of gluten, lots
of like soy-based vegetable
products that were not healthy.
So all of that kind of led up.
And then when I found the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet,
I made that change.
The profound thing was this.
Two weeks, two weeks into
the Specific Carbohydrate
Diet, my symptoms were gone.
>>SUE: Two weeks?
>>CARNAHAN: Two weeks.
>>SUE: You change your diet,
even though it had nothing
to do with your condition.
And two weeks later--
>>CARNAHAN: Symptoms gone.
>>SUE: What symptoms were gone?
>>CARNAHAN: So the bleeding,
the pain, the diarrhea.
And I wasn't cured.
It took me several
years to really heal.
But the symptoms--
>>SUE: But we knew you
were on to something.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
I know, I'm like, diet does
have something to do with it.
>>SUE: Turns out.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
So that was my first awakening.
I had gone into
medical school wanting
to do nutrition and wellness
and holistic medicine.
But that was my own
personal experience
with the profound power of food.
>>SUE: So where are you now
with this Crohn's condition?
How does that register
in your consciousness?
What role is it in your life?
Are you completely recovered?
What's happening?
>>CARNAHAN: So they
consider it incurable.
And it's funny, if I ever post--
I've written articles and
Twitter and things like that--
sometimes I'll
say about my cure,
here's how I cured my Crohn's
disease, people get so angry.
I don't know why.
Because maybe they
want to be the victim,
but they don't
believe it's cured.
I have zero symptoms, zero
evidence of the disease.
It's not in remission.
It's gone.
It is completely gone.
>>SUE: So they say it's
incurable, but you say--
>>CARNAHAN: It's gone.
>>SUE: --I'm cured.
>>CARNAHAN: And I have
no doubt in my mind.
>>SUE: I'm OK.
Is it OK for me to be OK?
>>CARNAHAN: Exactly.
>>SUE: I understand that
when we get a diagnosis,
it seems like a relief.
And yet, we attach
to that diagnosis.
And the longer we hold
onto the diagnosis,
the longer we have to
present in accordance
with what the prognosis is that
goes along with that diagnosis.
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: And so what
you did was break
through that whole paradigm.
And you said, you know, I don't
know if it's curable or not,
but I'm going to do this,
because it sounds smarter,
feels better to me.
You do it.
Two weeks later, your
symptoms are gone.
You're still asymptomatic.
And so you let go of
having this disease,
because you knew
there was something
else you could count on.
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: Sounds like it's
a combination of trusting
your own gut and trusting
your faith in a higher
vibrational frequency,
whether it's
universal intelligence, the
god source energy, however,
anyone would believe.
And you're combining
those things
and living a robust life.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: Yes.
Congratulations.
>>CARNAHAN: Thank you.
>>SUE: It's a beautiful thing.
>>CARNAHAN: It really is.
>>SUE: Yes.
It's an honor, really, to
be in conversation with you
about this very
deep life experience
that so many of our
viewers go through as well.
And so as you put
it all together,
and you've found a way of
working with your own life
experience, you found
a way of helping others
in a similar fashion.
And you're referencing it
as functional medicine.
Could you just tell
us a little bit
about what functional
medicine is, so
that we can get a reference
for where we're headed next
in our conversation?
>>CARNAHAN: Sure.
So functional medicine is
really root-cause medicine.
We're taught in medical school
to use drugs and surgery
for treatment of illness.
And that works very well
when you have a heart attack
or a car accident or trauma.
If it were me in an
automobile accident,
the first place I want to
go is a conventional ER
for treatment, right?
However, when we deal with
a more chronic illness,
like obesity, diabetes,
heart disease, et cetera,
autoimmunity in
particular, we don't
have great drugs or
surgery to treat those.
So the toolbox that we're
given in conventional medicine
is very small.
And my goal has always been
to get a bigger toolbox,
so that I have more resources
to heal the patients.
And I know you're
right in the same--
>>SUE: Absolutely necessary.
>>CARNAHAN: --line with that.
So functional medicine
just gave me--
it's funny, because
I knew I wanted
to do functional medicine before
I knew what it was called.
It was basically being a
great medical detective
and finding out what was
the trigger and the causes
and going backwards and
trying to reverse that.
So functional medicine really
gets to the root cause.
And I call myself a
medical detective.
That's kind of how it works.
>>SUE: So different
needs in crisis care
than in chronic illness,
different needs.
And so you operate differently.
You function differently in
your office with your patients
than if someone was
coming in, rushing in
after an automobile accident.
And so in that, what
kind of approach is it?
Who are your patients?
What is happening in
your clinical setting?
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
And before I address that,
I want to just mention,
we talked-- alluded to story.
I was with the medical system
as integrative director
in Illinois.
And then I moved out here in
2010 to start my own clinic.
And one of the things
that had to happen,
I had to basically
be an entrepreneur
and be my own marketer.
And I really remember the time
when I was comfortable enough
to put my story online, to
actually put it out there
for the public.
I'm actually quite an introvert.
And I'm a very private person.
You maybe wouldn't know that.
But part of my growth
has been because--
>>SUE: I understand.
>>CARNAHAN: --there's no
power in this suffering
or this experience
unless it's shared,
unless I go out there
and be completely
authentic with my patients,
with my fans, with the audience.
And for me, it was a really big
step when I put it out there.
And then as I started
teach physicians,
I would tell little
bits and little bits.
And I realized, every time
I would look at the audience
and see, and I would see
tears running down their face.
And I would see the impact.
And to me, there is no
greater purpose in my life
than to impact and inspire
other people through my story.
And as I would
see that, it would
encourage me to share more.
And it used to be I'd share
this "tied up in a bow"
picture of breast
cancer I overcame
and Crohn's, like
we talked about.
And now, I get even
more real about today.
What am I dealing with
and how am I overcoming
this thing today or this--
and it could be
emotional, physical.
But the more real and
authentic I can step up there
and be, the more impact.
And that is at the core
the success of everything
I've done, is being OK
with being so vulnerable
in a public setting.
>>SUE: Everything.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: I have to tell you,
I travel around the world,
and I teach other
doctors, and I teach
the layperson about
these alternative,
natural health care
means, and I have
to tell you that I come
across so many people that
are sharing this exact
story that they are shy,
they're introverted.
And yet, there's
something that they're
connecting with in this deep
internalization of themselves
that is actually what
I find is needed now.
It's what's creating the
doctor that is effective.
And it is what is creating
the self-healer that
is effective in our audiences,
in our patient base,
in our clientele.
What is happening is
people are intimately
connecting with
the soulful self,
their deep spiritual
being, their essence.
And it is the healer
that is rising up.
And you've discovered this.
And you're operating your
clinic, your approach,
from this exact perspective.
It is a most
beautiful contribution
to what I think is required
for humanity to rise up
into being self-empowered,
self-illuminating,
and self-healing.
>>CARNAHAN: And we can only
teach what we practice.
So it starts with us.
And I'm getting goosebumps
all over my body as you speak,
because what I was taught
in medical school was,
use the science.
I'm an analytical mind.
I love the science.
I was an engineer background.
So I love science.
But what I realized, as I
got into my intuitive self,
the power of taking complex
situations and large amounts
of data and analyzing it with
your brain and analytical mind
versus your heart and intuition,
the heart and intuition
can process thousands, if not
millions of times more data
in an instant.
I know.
And so what I do now is I
have this sense of knowing
of where I'm going and what
the problems with my patients
might be.
And then I prove
it with science.
So I still love and
use the science.
And I have a foundation
of great science.
But I start with the
heart and intuitive sense.
And it's a whole different way.
And it's way more accurate.
[LAUGHS]
>>SUE: Yes.
We were trained to
pick things apart.
To diagnose, we have
to pick it apart.
To heal, we have
to put it together.
And so this is what
you're finding.
This is what you're discovering.
This is what is
happening within you.
And it is a beautiful,
beautiful thing.
So when people come
to you, are you
the first doctor they come to?
Do they just like, [SNAP] oh,
I'm sick, I'm not feeling well,
I'm going to jump right into
my functional medicine doctor
and come to Dr. Jill?
Is this the person that you see?
>>CARNAHAN: No.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SUE: I was curious about that.
>>CARNAHAN: I joke.
Other doctors have
said this, but I always
joke about being the
resort doctor, which
is the doctor of last resort.
>>SUE: Not that you're
working on a resort location.
>>CARNAHAN: No.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SUE: But that you're
the last resort.
They come to you when
nothing else has worked.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
So I see people who have been
Cleveland Clinic and Stanford
University, and they've
been Mayo Clinic, any
of the major medical centers.
And the problem there
is they've gotten
an incredible
conventional workup.
But again, the toolbox that the
conventional system is limited.
So they've come up
against that toolbox
I remember in medical
school, I was the crazy one,
because I had this
integrative medical club.
And I was always getting
massage and acupuncture
and lecturers to come in and
teach us more new things.
And everybody thought
I was a little wacky.
Now, all of my colleagues
through medical school,
whether it's their
son or their husband
or their daughter or their
aunt, they have an illness,
they'll call me and
say, you know, Jill, I
thought you were a little off,
but now do you have any help
or do any answers
for me, because I'm
realizing my education
didn't prepare me for this.
And I see it all over the
place, that they're actually
realizing the power
now of the more
functional, integrative,
holistic approach.
>>SUE: So these patients
are going to doctors.
They're inquiring
about their odds,
their chances, their options.
And for whatever reason,
they either try those things
and it hasn't worked, or they're
afraid to try those things.
And then they end up coming
to you as a last resort.
Is it because they just
didn't get the answers that
were feeling appropriate?
What is it that they say to you?
Why do they come to you?
What do they say that that
has landed them finally
in front of you?
I'm curious about this,
because I would really
love for people to
just come straight
to these kinds of approaches,
where someone is going
to take ahold of your case--
and not have it be a case,
but take ahold of your life
circumstances and
investigate what
is working for you in this
multidimensional being,
this beautiful
creature that you are,
what is not connecting
that's allowing you
to be sick in the first place.
So how do we get
people to recognize
that they can come straight
to this line of thinking
and this approach and
perhaps cut to the chase
a little sooner?
>>CARNAHAN: Well,
there's a select few that
are more the people
have resources
and they really are interested
in optimizing performance.
And I do that as well.
So that's one area I love.
And that's the small percentage
that are aware enough to say,
I want to improve
my performance.
I want improve my gut,
I want improve my brain,
I want improved my physicality.
I want to be optimally
performing in every area--
spiritually,
mentally, physically.
How can you help me?
And I can absolutely help them.
Those are the ones we
would love to see more of.
>>SUE: Now, is this in
a proactive kind of way?
Or they have an
illness, and they're--
>>CARNAHAN: No, some--
there's a small percentage.
>>SUE: They're not so sick.
They're just like, hey, I
just want to up-level my--
>>CARNAHAN: Yes, performance.
>>SUE: --life, my
performance in life.
>>CARNAHAN: Exactly.
>>SUE: My experience.
>>CARNAHAN: So there are a few.
The rest, which is the
majority, are very, very sick
and they've been
a lot of places.
You ask about what is the thing
that I give that's different.
I think the inspiration
and hope piece.
Because they've been beaten
down by doctor after doctor
after doctor.
They've been told they're crazy.
They've been told, see
a psychiatrist, which
is, I think, the most
awful thing anyone
could be told when they're
actually physically ill.
And they come, and they
know, or they read my story,
and they have a sense of hope.
>>SUE: As if to infer that a
psychiatrist approach might not
be addressing the fact that
they are tuned into something,
right?
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: Nothing wrong with
going to a psychiatrist--
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: --if the
psychiatrist is interested
in a holistic approach as well.
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: But not to infer,
look, this is all in your head
and you just need to--
>>CARNAHAN: That's
what I'm saying.
>>SUE: --you need
to clear that up.
>>CARNAHAN: I completely
see a role for psychiatry.
Just the fact of if there's a
physical illness that someone's
denying and telling
them, this doesn't exist,
it's all-- you're crazy.
That's what's not OK with me.
And you see those patients
who come and they've just--
I see tears every
day in my office.
I have people fly
from all over the US
to come see me, because they
sense that there's a hope.
And there's a sense--
the truth is I really care.
Every person that comes
in I care about them.
I really do.
And that's that nurturer part.
But now, I have
become healthy enough
to be able to have a boundary,
so that I don't take it home.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>CARNAHAN: But while I'm
there with them, and I--
>>SUE: I understand.
>>CARNAHAN: --put
everything into that case,
and they sense that.
It's the unspoken thing.
But the truth is that I
will give them everything
I have to help them heal.
>>SUE: Yes, absolutely.
And that is exactly what
is required for healing.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah
>>SUE: Is to be met.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: Just meet me.
Let me know I'm OK.
Let me know I can do this.
And now, let's get busy
with some functional things
that I can begin to
shift this energetically,
to turn the tides in my favor,
instead of allowing my mind
to lock into this belief there's
nothing you can do, this is
never going to
heal, you're going
to have multiple surgeries
and be on multiple medications
for the rest of your life.
It's not a very
positive outlook.
So you're shifting that.
When you dig in,
what are you looking
for in a patient's history,
in their medical history?
And yeah, just let's go there.
And then I might have another
question for you after that.
>>CARNAHAN: Sure.
So I see a lot of-- you ask
about types of conditions.
I see a lot of
autoimmunity, obesity,
chronic metabolic
types of stuff.
What I do typically is I want to
ask about where were you born.
Were you born vaginally
versus C-section,
because those things actually
affect the microbiome.
What were your
parents' illnesses
and how-- so generationally,
you can see patterns.
And I'll start-- it might
be an 85-year-old man,
but I will start with his birth
and was he breast or bottle fed
and was he vaginal
versus C-section.
And then his family and
his family dynamics,
there's so often a family
dynamic, an alcoholic parent,
those things will
affect the health.
>>SUE: You bet.
>>CARNAHAN: And so I'm
asking about those things.
And what I start with as I
sit down and they sit there,
I let them relax a minute.
I get them a glass of tea.
I said, tell me your story.
That's what I start with,
because everybody has a story.
And most of time, they sigh.
Some people cry when I say
that, because no one's ever just
paused.
I don't speak.
And I let them tell
me their story.
And sometimes, I'll ask
questions to clarify.
But I'm there to listen
and to hear them.
And they often, in a physician's
office, have never been heard.
>>SUE: Once witnessed,
we are changed forever.
If someone holds the space
for us, we start to unfold,
we start to blossom.
And so it's a beautiful
thing when we actually care,
when it's not just a system--
we have to get him in and get
him out and that kind of thing.
Those days are numbered.
People are not
tolerating that anymore.
And we shouldn't, right.
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: So you
mentioned something
about asking about
family history
and the genetic inheritance
in that capacity.
What do you think about
epigenetics and the idea
that our beliefs are
contributing to our tendency
to out-picture in a disease
condition and our ability
to shift this.
And this is why--
This was the other question
I was going to come to.
So when we are asked, does
your mother have this,
did your father have this,
is it locking into the belief
that if it was in my up-line,
I'm more prone to have this,
I'm likely to have this.
Do you feel that
there is something
we can do to start shifting
how we approach the belief
system in people that
could be contributing
to the ultimate
out-picturing of disease?
>>CARNAHAN: Yes, 100%.
So you mentioned epigenetics.
Epigenetics is
really the ability--
So we do all these
gene tests now.
And it comes in a black and
white report with this gene you
have, and this gene
you don't have,
and this gene may
cause this disease.
But the truth is our
food intake, number one;
our environmental toxic exposure
is number two; our beliefs,
our ability to be optimistic
or depressed or happy or sad
or our mental emotional
states, our connection with God
or higher power, every
single thing and more
will influence the
ability of those genes
to either express
or not express.
So you may have a gene black
and white on a piece of paper.
But the fact that
I believed that I
was going to be cured
from Crohn's and cancer,
that belief actually
was part of my healing.
>>SUE: You bet.
I totally get that
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: Yeah.
So of those things,
environmental toxins,
this trilogy that you
were just referencing,
is there a priority there?
Is there one that has a
greater influence than others?
You speak so highly about
the role of belief and faith
and the allowance of that.
Does that pri-- outweigh our
external environmental toxins
or our nutritional intake?
Or is there any kind
of prioritization
in your perception there?
>>CARNAHAN: Well,
so I have the belief
that we can overcome
anything we believe.
So there is a huge power there.
But the fact that I got
cancer to begin with
was probably due to the fact, in
part, that I grew up in a farm
in central Illinois, where some
of the highest use of things
like atrazine and organic
phosphates and glyphosate
were present.
All of those things can
have endocrine and microbial
disrupting effects, so that
someone as a young woman
is more prone to have cells in
her breast that rapidly divide
and become cancerous.
So from my perspective, my
poor detoxification genetics,
in addition to toxic
exposure, probably as a child,
maybe in utero, in my mother's
womb, led to these cells--
probably at five
or six, because it
takes a decade or two for those
cancer cells to become cancer.
So if I was 25, I probably
had my first insult
at five or 10 years
old for the cells
to start to become--
doing abnormal things.
So those environmental
toxins are huge.
You mentioned a triad.
I want to be just real
clear with our audience.
So autoimmune disease-- which is
Crohn's or rheumatoid arthritis
or multiple sclerosis or
Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
and many more, lupus--
all of these have a commonality.
And as a functional
medicine doctor,
the thing underlying
this is a triad.
And the number one
thing is genetics.
So you can't--
I have a gene that predisposes
me for Crohn's disease.
I have another that
predisposes me for cancer.
So that fits with my history.
So you can't change that gene.
You can change expression
through food and diet
and beliefs.
But the other two
things you can change
and the other two things
in the triad are the gut.
So the gut immune
interface happens
along our intestinal lining.
And what happens is, if we
have abnormal microbiome,
meaning the bugs that are
contained inside of our gut,
they will actually
trigger immune responses
and cause an abnormal
attack on self.
And the third thing is
environmental triggers.
That could be
something like gluten
as a food source,
could be toxic mold.
It could be
environmental chemicals.
So this triad of genetics, gut,
and environmental exposures,
that really underlies
all autoimmune disease.
So I could have an MS patient
or Hashimoto's patient
walk in my office, I'm going
to go to the same route
and look at those three things.
>>SUE: Do you feel
that this diagnosis,
and then the treatment
that you went through,
and the intensity of all of that
created any kind of quickening
inside of you that
awakened you to a higher
level of your own empowerment,
that maybe you never would have
awakened to had you not
been through these sets
of circumstances?
Did it serve in that way?
>>CARNAHAN: Absolutely.
I think every experience--
I went through divorce,
the breast cancer,
the Crohn's disease,
mold exposure,
which caused illness,
on and on and on.
But every single step of
the way, God has shown me,
I have more for you.
And I'm taking you
through these things
as training and experience
for the next level.
I continue to see that.
And I'm always in
awe, like, God,
what do you have next for me?
Because it's going to be big.
Because I just see the
sense of it's not about me.
It's about how can I love
and serve other people.
But he continues to take me
through some really difficult
things.
I'm his guinea
pig, I always joke.
Like, what's Jill
going to do next?
And he takes me through these
things that are difficult.
But every time, I get lessons
and I get more empowerment
of not only my faith, because
I know that he has gotten me
through anything.
There is nothing
that you could tell
me is coming my way that
I would be afraid of.
>>SUE: Right.
Like, I got this.
>>CARNAHAN: Nothing.
Yeah, I got it.
>>SUE: Bring it.
>>CARNAHAN: Bring it on.
>>SUE: But don't bring it.
I don't need it.
I don't need it to
convince myself.
>>CARNAHAN: But I
don't have the fear.
There's nothing that
could come my way that I
couldn't conquer with God.
So that's powerful.
>>SUE: So regarding this triad
that you're speaking about,
what you're doing is empowering
the overarching consciousness
of the individual
that has the ability
to manage these things
in a different way.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: They can be in charge.
They don't have to be
at the effect of even
their inheritance
genetically or at the effect
any longer of what
they grew up with.
We have the power to turn
these genes on and off.
We have the power to generate
a different vibrational
frequency, one of healing,
in our own systems.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
My role of, more than
physician, is teacher.
I am a teacher.
Because if I give them
education and they understand,
then they can take
it and roll with it.
My happiest moment
are when patients
don't come back to see me
because they're doing so well.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>CARNAHAN: And then
make room for more.
>>SUE: Unpacking the mystery,
unpacking the mystery.
So more and more, autoimmune
diseases are being diagnosed.
I know that when I opened
my clinic, my practice,
over 30 years ago, this
was a rare statement that
came across my
desk, that someone
would come in or have a
diagnosis in this direction
of autoimmunity.
What do you feel about that?
Can you comment on what's
going on in our culture,
that this diagnosis is running
rampant in our society.
>>CARNAHAN: I really believe
the elephant in the room
is the environmental toxic load.
So the amount of chemicals that
are approved for use in the US
every year is astronomical,
in the hundreds of thousands.
And most of these have no
testing on humans, especially
long term testing.
So we're dumping
these toxic chemicals
into the environment
at astronomical rates.
And it's exponentially
growing the exposures,
because it's in our food supply.
It's in our water supply.
It's in our air supply.
80% of environmental
toxic exposure
is in the air, which
is crazy to me.
Because we think about food
and other things, but the air
we breathe could be killing us.
There's a paper recently on
inhalation Alzheimer's, which
is 30% of the cases in this
study were due to inhaled mold
or other toxic effects
that caused Alzheimer's.
That's crazy.
So this toxic load-- and
most of these chemicals
have half lives in
the 50 or more years.
So they're accumulating
at rapid, rapid rates.
And so that load--
our bodies are designed
to heal and overcome.
But what happens is this load
will weigh down the system
and make it very difficult and
sluggish to be able to heal.
>>SUE: We've lost touch
with making smart decisions
for our environment.
We've lost touch with
nature and the fact
that we are at one
with our environment,
to even allow the
inventions of such things
that create such
toxicity for ourselves.
We're inventing ourselves
right out of our own wholeness.
It's so amazingly ironic.
It's such a
non-nurturing principle.
And speaking of
nurturing and the fact
that you ended up with
these nurturing type disease
conditions, what can you say
about autoimmune and women
in the diagnosis?
Are more women being diagnosed
with autoimmune conditions,
et cetera, than men?
And if so, why?
>>CARNAHAN: I love talking
about this, because not
many physicians are even aware.
Number one, testosterone
has a huge impact
on calming some of the
autoimmune reactivity.
So obviously, men have more
testosterone than women.
And that's one of
the reasons we see it
at much larger
proportions in women.
The other thing we see, you
mentioned the metaphorical,
like the nurturing
with breast cancer,
with autoimmune disease, the
core issue is attack of self.
And I have found in my
own journey and journey
of patients, there's usually
unexpressed sadness, grief,
or anger.
>>SUE: You bet.
>>CARNAHAN: And I've gone
through my own journey of this.
And even recently,
I really opened up
to actually expressing
and feeling some grief
that I completely--
My story was I have been very
driven, very productive, very
successful.
And part of that
came at the cost
of numbing myself to pain
and suffering and anger.
I would've told you--
>>SUE: Outrun it.
Outperform it.
>>CARNAHAN:
Outperform it, right?
And so very recently,
I have actually
allowed myself to feel
some of these old things.
And it was painful.
But as I came out, I was a much
softer, more balanced version
of myself.
And I know that part of that is
healing the autoimmune disease.
Because that self-directed
anger is really at the core.
>>SUE: You bet.
Our culture has created so
much of this-- externalization
of power, what do people think,
how do I look, how is my body,
do I fit in, am I enough.
This constant comparison on
every level of our lives.
And it translates energetically
into, I'm not enough.
I'm not good enough.
I don't compare.
I don't measure up.
And that translates to
the body has no choice
but to respond to
what we're constantly
creating as our environment.
And so it starts trying to
attack what we don't love.
So we're onto this.
And it's time to be fully
embracing of ourselves
as an individual, as an
individual expression
of this god source energy, as
you're speaking about today,
and allow it to be enough.
If we don't, it's
exhausting to us.
Can you speak to fatigue
regarding all of this
and what you see in your
functional medicine practice?
>>CARNAHAN: So fatigue is
really a cellular process that
happens with the mitochondria.
And so many things--
toxic chemicals, mold,
endocrine disruption, or
endocrine dysfunction,
adrenals, thyroid, female
and male hormones--
all of these things can--
and viruses and infections.
At the core of my functional
medicine practice,
most of the time in
complex illnesses
there's one of two
things happening,
and both cause fatigue--
infectious load, like
we talked about, or--
sorry, infection load,
which we didn't talk about;
or toxic load, which
we did talk about.
The toxins and
infections tend to be
at the core of a lot
of these fatigue cases,
even when there's disruption
of the HPA axis or adrenals
or thyroid or any of the organs
that produce energy for us.
>>SUE: So what makes
our adrenals just
grind all the time?
What is that?
>>CARNAHAN: Stress.
[LAUGHS] So stress
gets a bad name.
There's eustress, and
we all need some stress
to perform optimally.
So I know I won't
be at my best if I
don't have a deadline, and an
idea of what's going to happen,
and maybe a stage
with a big audience.
Those things are
actually stressful,
but they're good stress, because
they help me perform optimally.
>>SUE: Creative edge.
>>CARNAHAN: Correct, correct.
But when we put ourself
under-- especially
like I was telling
you years ago when
I would suppress grief or
sadness and just go, go, go,
had to be super productive.
And often-- again, I'll
just speak for myself--
we tie performance with love.
So I learned very early,
if I got straight As
and I did good in school, my
parents would be really happy
and show me love.
>>SUE: Earn my connection.
>>CARNAHAN: Earn my connection.
So I am, again, a
recovering perfectionist
in that sense of I felt
for many, many years
that I was loved due to
what I did for people
or how I performed.
And coming away from that-- it's
an addiction like any other--
coming away from that
addiction to performance
and actually
allowing myself just
to be still, where there's
no productive endpoint,
be still hiking in the
mountains in Boulder
and enjoying nature,
that actually
nourishes my soul more than
getting another deadline
finished.
Like, coming to that point
and realize that there's
value with stillness--
>>SUE: Yes, absolutely.
>>CARNAHAN: --is important.
>>SUE: And to be
still on the inside.
I run down airport
concourses every week
because I'm always traveling
and teaching and holding
workshops myself.
And so life is pushing me to
get out there and do this thing.
But I insist on being still
on the inside when I'm
in full stride on the outside.
And it translates as allowing
my adrenals to get a signal,
all is well.
We might be full
stride, but all is well.
>>CARNAHAN: All is well.
Well, we have to be
deliberate about that,
or the world will push
us, push us, push us.
So if we are not deliberately
standing our ground
and knowing who we are,
what our purpose is,
and coming at it with that
sense of peace and stillness,
the world will push us over.
>>SUE: And allowing ourselves
to feel it on the inside.
I find this is one
of the missing links,
is that we live in
our heads, and we
don't allow ourselves to
feel this deep connection
that we are divinely guided.
We are here as the expression
of that universal consciousness.
We are cosmic beings.
We are made of everything.
Nothing missing, nothing
broken, nothing wrong.
So as we begin to
live in this way,
we start to overcome
things like fatigue
and this disorientation
that so often is
referenced as brain fog.
Can you speak to the
relationship between fatigue,
brain fog, these
senses of disconnection
that people are feeling
and lack of vital force?
>>CARNAHAN: So again, I
see the physicality of it
is that toxic load, infections
bring all these things,
weighing them down.
But even, like you
said, if they're not
connected with source or self
or a purpose in life-- purpose
is one of the most commonly
missed things that people don't
have, that are floundering
with health or with life
or with decisions.
And when they find that source
of purpose and centeredness,
that will end up
driving everything,
even the will to overcome.
I think the brain fog comes--
Obviously, the brain is
an organ like any other.
So if you're getting affected
by the cells with fatigue,
your brain is affected.
Especially with toxins like
mold or other toxic exposures,
the brain tends
to be very largely
affected by those things.
But the source, the answer
to it is still the same.
It's getting grounded,
getting healing,
choosing to detoxify
your environment,
and being still, like you
mentioned in the airport.
>>SUE: So this relationship
between fatigue and toxicity,
very strongly interwoven.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: You've had your
own experience with this.
Can you just say a
little bit about that
to land it for everybody?
>>CARNAHAN: Sure, you got it.
So I was going along great,
Crohn's and cancer in my past.
I started to practice in
Boulder and moved offices once.
And in 2013, there was a
massive flood in Boulder.
And unbeknownst to me, my office
building had been flooded.
And right below my office was
a large amount of Stachybotrys,
which is a very toxic--
The toxin from the trichothecene
is used in chemical warfare.
It's a known neurotoxin,
immunotoxin, just awful.
And I started becoming fatigued,
brain fog, skin rashes,
couldn't walk upstairs without
getting short of breath.
My lungs were affected.
So I knew there was
something going on there.
And that began my journey
really to learn about toxic mold
and heal people
from that as well.
>>SUE: So was this a mystery
in your world at this point?
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: And how did you go
about leaning into the mystery
and unpacking it?
>>CARNAHAN: The funny thing
was I was so in denial,
because usually--
And I have a compassion
for my patients,
because when you
have a mold issue,
it's your home or
your workplace,
it's kind of your safe
place is not safe.
And there's a very deep
physiological trigger
with patients who've had mold
exposure, including myself,
which I feel like I've
overcome with this.
It's PTSD, because you get
this attack of something
you don't know.
It's foreign.
And it actually affects
physiology profoundly,
causes very, very,
very intense illness.
And to come out
of that, you have
to get out of the exposure.
So you have to leave home,
things, workplace behind,
start over, and
then heal yourself.
>>SUE: And it's elusive.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: You don't think
of that that's what's
causing me to feel this way.
You don't connect the dots.
So what were your symptoms
that were initiating for you?
What unfolded there?
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah, respiratory
tract is almost always
affected, because
we're breathing
in those VOCs, volatile
organic solvents from mold.
So I had shortness of breath.
I had a little bit of wheezing.
I've never had
asthma in my life.
But at 40 years old when I got
the exposure-- or actually 38,
but it started causing wheezing
and issues with asthma.
Brain fog was a big one.
And then skin rashes,
mucous membranes
are red and irritated.
The gut can be affected.
So you can have pain,
heartburn, gas and bloating.
Infections, because your immune
system is kind of crashed,
so you get frequent infections.
Numbness, tingling,
neuropathies,
almost every system
can be affected.
>>SUE: So all of these
subtle irritants playing out
for a long time is
exhausting the system.
Your own immunity
becomes depleted.
We're unaware of it.
It's subliminal as an irritant.
And yet ultimately,
it starts to surface
as this confluence of symptoms
that are making you sick,
making you
dysfunctional, et cetera.
>>CARNAHAN: It's a
mystery of all mysteries.
Now that I've experienced
that, I see it all the time.
And I'm always shocked at
how many people are affected.
Because they might have
an autoimmune disease,
mold can trigger
autoimmunity, they
might have brain fog or
early onset dementia.
They might have new onset
asthma or allergies.
So they come to the doctor.
They might have gut issues,
like bacterial overgrowth
in their bowel.
So they come to the doctor
with one of these organ system
problems, and the
doctor often doesn't
know that there's a bigger
issue, and it's the mold.
>>SUE: So you were going
through this yourself.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah.
>>SUE: So this isn't
something you read about,
cases that you're gathering
information on in hopes
to share it with someone else.
You've been there.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: You get it.
So at some point, you
discovered, oh my gosh,
it's my very safe space that's
actually making me sick.
And then what did you do
to detoxify your body?
What did you do?
>>CARNAHAN: So it was 2014,
the day after Christmas,
I found the report from the
mold from the bulk sample.
I saw Stachybotrys, and
it matched the urine test
that I had done on my
body showing the toxin.
So it matched.
So I was like, this is an issue.
From that day, that
was 2014, I never
stepped foot back in my office.
I had 20 years of
medical school books--
you know how that goes-- my
library, and I love books.
I always joke, before
I was a physician,
I always thought I was
going to be a librarian.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SUE: Right.
I got plenty.
>>CARNAHAN: Thank
goodness, I wouldn't have
gotten much impact in that.
Well, maybe, but got
a different plan.
But I love my books,
is my point here.
>>SUE: Yes, I understand.
Precious.
>>CARNAHAN: So I
got rid of them all.
And everything in the office,
I left and walked away.
And I started in like
a temporary office
space for a few months, and then
eventually got my own office,
a new office that was clean.
But it was quite an ordeal.
For two months, I worked from
home doing phone consults,
because that's all I had.
I didn't have an office.
And I was pretty sick.
I just got by.
But it was a
devastating experience,
because I lost everything.
>>SUE: Not just your
books, but all of your--
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah, everything
in my office was gone.
>>SUE: Wow.
Tough.
>>CARNAHAN: Yeah, it was--
>>SUE: We have to make a
decision, though, right?
>>CARNAHAN: You do,
and that's what--
patients, every
day in my office,
they talk to them
about, there's probably
a mold issue in your house,
what are you going to do?
Not everybody has
to leave everything.
So that's the good news.
But some of them have
to make hard decisions.
And they're always-- if they're
attached to their material
things--
For me, the biggest
lesson there was health
is the thing that matters most.
All these material
things can be replaced,
but your health can't.
And so I chose.
And I always encourage
patients to do the same,
to choose your health,
because you can replace books.
You can place furniture.
You can place all--
>>SUE: Stuff.
>>CARNAHAN: Stuff.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Actually letting go
of our attachments
in every level of our
lives is a wonderful way
to begin a healing
process, because--
>>CARNAHAN: And it did.
>>SUE: --when we were
attached, we have to defend,
whether it's attached
to library books
or it's attached to
a belief or attached
to some perception of
self that we think we are,
as long as we're
attached, we will defend.
And as long as we're in
needing to defend something,
we're not free and we're
constantly using part
of our energies to defend--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>SUE: --these things,
instead of being
available to what's next
for us in our own evolution.
Now, you mentioned
growing up on a farm
and possibly being
exposed to toxins there.
Is there a relationship here
between this constant surfacing
of this sensitivity?
What can you say to people
that have possibly also
been exposed to toxins
throughout the course
of their life and what
they can do to not allow
that to be the prevailing
story of their lives,
but to transcend it?
>>CARNAHAN: I love that.
So yes, I really believe
there was much toxic chemical,
probably our well
water and everything
in between, that
I was exposed to.
And I was born with genetics
that don't detoxify well.
Again, I've overcome that.
But that made for a perfect
storm for young illness,
as I experienced.
And my sister at 27
had thyroid cancer.
So that's two girls,
25, 27, cancer.
That tells you something
about the environment, right?
Genetics plus environment.
Overcoming-- so I
teach patients--
I love cleanses and detoxes, but
I'd much rather teach patients
daily habits to
detoxify, because we're
in such a toxic world,
I say we're swimming
in toxic soup every day.
It's swimming around us.
We're in it.
We can't get out of it.
So we have to daily be
deliberate on the choices we
make in the ways we detoxify
in order to get out ahead.
That could mean Epsom
salt baths at night.
It could mean drinking alkaline
or mineral water between meals.
It could mean doing infrared
sauna three sessions per week.
It could mean getting
out hiking and sweating.
It could mean--
Food is a big thing.
People don't even
think about that.
But whatever we're
putting into our body
is part of the toxic load.
So just choosing organic
when possible is a great way
to start.
>>SUE: Hm.
And in this toxic environment
that everyone is swimming in,
do you feel that--
well, actually, let
me just say this.
How do you recommend
people recognize
that they're
surrounded by toxicness
and they might not even know it.
How do you recommend that they
begin their own investigation?
>>CARNAHAN: So I can do tests in
the office if they want proof.
And we can show in their urine
or in their blood the levels.
Recently, out of Canada,
there was a cord blood study
of babies born.
First day of life, they
took the cord blood,
200 chemicals measured
in the cord blood
from the first day of life.
To me, that just
shows you we're being
born into this world
loaded with toxins.
So we are--
>>SUE: So the foods
that our mother
was eating, through
the environment,
through the womb,
all of it is here.
>>CARNAHAN: So we
are born into it.
I understand what you're saying,
because there are some people
who don't-- you
don't always feel it.
And if you're
resilient and healthy,
you can get a lot of load
and not really notice it.
I think the testing
I do will often
help them see, because
they can see the values.
But if they're dealing
with an illness,
then I can explain
the connection
between their illness
and that load.
And that is usually
pretty profound.
>>SUE: So everything is energy.
We are energy.
Our consciousness is energy.
We have the ability,
through free will,
to change the vibrational
frequency of our experience.
We can decide what
something means to us.
We can decide, as
you have witnessed,
what's going to happen
because of my diagnosis,
or because of my
circumstances, or even
because of a toxic
environment that I'm in.
And so do you feel that it
is about the environment
or it is about our free
will choice that determines
our healing capacity?
At the end of the day,
what's the bottom line?
>>CARNAHAN: I think, it
ultimately comes down
to the will.
Because I mean, I should
be dead, I'm a miracle.
You've heard my story now.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>CARNAHAN: And that was
purely God's grace and my will.
>>SUE: Yeah.
We don't have to accept--
>>CARNAHAN: No.
>>SUE: --the first answer--
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: --if it doesn't
feel acceptable to us.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: Keep asking.
>>SUE: Until we
find someone that
aligns with the deep
knowing inside of us.
That's what you did.
>>CARNAHAN: Yes.
>>SUE: Thank you very
much for sharing--
>>CARNAHAN: You're welcome.
>>SUE: --your story.
Yeah, it's been beautiful.
>>CARNAHAN: Thank you.
>>SUE: Traditional medicine
is incredibly effective
in emergency situations
and when we have
a clear and simple diagnosis.
But what if you have
chronic symptoms
and you've seen so many
doctors that your case has
grown more and more complex?
Dr. Jill Carnahan and her story
gives us hope to never give up
and to continue seeking answers.
Dr. Jill genuinely
heals from the heart,
because she knows what it
is like to be a patient.
For more information on Dr.
Jill and functional medicine,
visit jillcarnahan.com.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter,
and thank you
for watching "Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]